---
layout: post
title: Why is Deep Learning hot now?
comments: true
---

here has been a lot of attention towards a particular discipline of Machine Learning in recent times. Deep Learning has become a Swiss Army knife that everyone from a startup to an academic lab wants to own. From a high level, it extends human powers of perception for multi-modal data points like images, sound, text and time series. 

We have situation where in there are many developers who are ready to work in this ambit of Machine Learning but very few companies/startups have the ability to fuel this skill with reverent business problems. It is also true that Deep Learning has achieved high accuracy resulting in good performance in lab settings which may necessarily not be the case outside of this environment. I believe  Deep Learning is become a hot topic because of the fact that large companies have begun to hire researchers who have led labs/groups in academia. Unlike, other technologies, that spend few decades before coming out of the institutional labs, Deep Learning in a way has been prematurely hired. This has opened up an ocean of opportunities for anyone to productize and use the power of Deep Learning.

The empirical results [[1]](http://deeplearning4j.org/accuracy.html) of Deep Learning has gained the trust of some giants [[2]](http://www.fastcompany.com/3026423/why-google-is-investing-in-deep-learning) is what underpins the hype we see in media. On the other hand is sounds like just stacking up a bunch of RBMs or perceptrons, throw some data at them and hope for something meaningful. I agree to this view, but I also believe it is only constrained by time. The more effort that is now being put into research (partiality because of the media's attention) to advance Deep Learning will surly make a fine tech to adopt and deploy. 

No Machine Learning algorithm is a silver bullet, but Deep Learning will be much more useful and in demand in the days to come as the cost of computing reduces, opportunity to gather data increases and the performance improves.
 
